---
title: Why Baahu?
author: TJ Kandala
authorURL: http://twitter.com/tjkandala
---

## State machines are great

- talk about why state machines are great for UI programming. however, the existing solutions ain't enough bc of:

## Abstraction Spaghetti

Three parts to this: 1) perf, 2) bundle size, 3) code complexity

Zero dependencies!

- When you type a letter in React + Context/Redux + XState:

- When you type a letter in Baahu:

Too many web applications lag on my 2017 touchbar MBP. I'm not trying to buy a new laptop every two years. I love that modern frameworks have enabled people to create web applications with much larger scope than before. This is why my suggested solution is not to revoke all libraries and write artisinal vanilla js. Instead, we should try to make

- baahu is very focused in what it is/does:

## Decision Fatigue

I know, studies say decision fatigue isn't real. However, . Your app will be better off if you spend more time making decisions that are not

Brainstorm

- start with a short pitch for why state-machines are important in UI programming. then, explain why the existing solutions are inadequate:

- awkwardness of integrating state machines with existing frameworks: WAY too many abstractions (explain the impedance mismatch). most suitable for one-off widgets, but hard to architect your application around. to make matters worse, this results in bloated websites. (explain in depth all of the computation/steps that happen in an XState + react + context/redux app, from browser event handler -> synth event -> sending message to mach -> xstate service creates a new machine -> set the state of your react component -> rerender the whole subtree (if you didn't manually memoize children) -> diff the two subtrees (more steps r in here) -> DOM painting. show an example of how this results in input lag + bundle size for lighthouse. don't forget to mention that the original purpose was to improve DX for state-machine-component-based apps, but as a result of simplification, UX is improved thru perf! talk about how computers are perceived to be slower than ever despite being faster than ever! explain that developers have to put in way more effort to make a performance react app that only renders components that NEED to render (thru memo/pure component), link to diagram on opts! at the same time, talk about why a compiler isn't the end-all approach (link to dan abramov tweet). doing less work <3)

* lightweight state machine runtime, but can achieve . sacrifices some of the modeling power of XState for more flexibility and performance

## High level reasons:

- embracing that every stateful component is a state machine. explicit state machines > implicit state machines

* escaping the "tyranny of the tree." UI components are hierarchical (reference view hierarchy); parents have children, those children have children, and so on. This is a good abstraction for layouts; they are trees, after all. However, why should _message passing_ be modeled the same way? Why should a parent have to give permission to a child to communicate with it? Sharing state between leaves shouldn't be this hard! At best, you work hard to create "lightning bolts" of precise rendering, because you _have_ to render any intermediate components.

Also, communicating btwn leaves of two subtrees involves the rendering of _tons_ of components when using the props model. A component has to set the state of an other. This model is excellent for making reusable components, but . Events are better: .

- it becomes a lot easier to create the equivalent application in baahu vs react (need code comparisons)

- finally, talk about what kinds of sites/apps baahu is NOT suitable for!

Baahu might actually be most suitable for small-to-mid-sized applications with medium-to-high levels of interactivity. When your application grows over 1mb of original JS, the fixed cost of using React & friends becomes less significant. Ecosystem and learning materials are important for big teams. Yes, you can't code-split the 200kb+ of essential dependencies, but on applications of this size, users typically spend much more time _on_ the application that loading. Runtime performance is a different matter; . React also seems to have big plans for problems in the "extremely large SPA" space.

## The Baahu runtime

## Is the browser appropriate for apps

We've hijacked a document

lighthouse scores of popular apps

[Arguments](https://twitter.com/devongovett/status/1261378078564970498)

[The web's big enough for both](https://twitter.com/AdamRackis/status/1261414350159519749).

Why not native? Browsers/web are beautiful technologies, we should try to move as much as possible to this platform.
